CHAPTER CXVI. THE DYING WHALE


Not seldom in this life, when, on the right side, fortunes favorites
sail close by us, we, though all adroop before, catch somewhat of the
rushing breeze, and joyfully feel our bagging sails fill out. So seemed
it with the Pequod. For next day after encountering the gay Bachelor,
whales were seen and four were slain; and one of them by Ahab.

It was far down the afternoon; and when all the spearings of the
crimson fight were done: and floating in the lovely sunset sea and sky,
sun and whale both stilly died together; then, such a sweetness and
such plaintiveness, such inwreathing orisons curled up in that rosy
air, that it almost seemed as if far over from the deep green convent
valleys of the Manilla isles, the Spanish land-breeze, wantonly turned
sailor, had gone to sea, freighted with these vesper hymns.

Soothed again, but only soothed to deeper gloom, Ahab, who had sterned
off from the whale, sat intently watching his final wanings from the
now tranquil boat. For that strange spectacle observable in all sperm
whales dyingthe turning sunwards of the head, and so expiringthat
strange spectacle, beheld of such a placid evening, somehow to Ahab
conveyed a wondrousness unknown before.

He turns and turns him to it,how slowly, but how steadfastly, his
homage-rendering and invoking brow, with his last dying motions. He too
worships fire; most faithful, broad, baronial vassal of the sun!Oh
that these too-favoring eyes should see these too-favoring sights.
Look! here, far water-locked; beyond all hum of human weal or woe; in
these most candid and impartial seas; where to traditions no rocks
furnish tablets; where for long Chinese ages, the billows have still
rolled on speechless and unspoken to, as stars that shine upon the
Nigers unknown source; here, too, life dies sunwards full of faith;
but see! no sooner dead, than death whirls round the corpse, and it
heads some other way.

Oh, thou dark Hindoo half of nature, who of drowned bones hast builded
thy separate throne somewhere in the heart of these unverdured seas;
thou art an infidel, thou queen, and too truly speakest to me in the
wide-slaughtering Typhoon, and the hushed burial of its after calm. Nor
has this thy whale sunwards turned his dying head, and then gone round
again, without a lesson to me.

Oh, trebly hooped and welded hip of power! Oh, high aspiring,
rainbowed jet!that one strivest, this one jettest all in vain! In
vain, oh whale, dost thou seek intercedings with yon all-quickening
sun, that only calls forth life, but gives it not again. Yet dost thou,
darker half, rock me with a prouder, if a darker faith. All thy
unnamable imminglings, float beneath me here; I am buoyed by breaths of
once living things, exhaled as air, but water now.

Then hail, for ever hail, O sea, in whose eternal tossings the wild
fowl finds his only rest. Born of earth, yet suckled by the sea; though
hill and valley mothered me, ye billows are my foster-brothers!




CHAPTER CXVII. THE WHALE WATCH


The four whales slain that evening had died wide apart; one, far to
windward; one, less distant, to leeward; one ahead; one astern. These
last three were brought alongside ere nightfall; but the windward one
could not be reached till morning; and the boat that had killed it lay
by its side all night; and that boat was Ahabs.

The waif-pole was thrust upright into the dead whales spout-hole; and
the lantern hanging from its top, cast a troubled flickering glare upon
the black, glossy back, and far out upon the midnight waves, which
gently chafed the whales broad flank, like soft surf upon a beach.

Ahab and all his boats crew seemed asleep but the Parsee; who
crouching in the bow, sat watching the sharks, that spectrally played
round the whale, and tapped the light cedar planks with their tails. A
sound like the moaning in squadrons over Asphaltites of unforgiven
ghosts of Gomorrah, ran shuddering through the air.

Started from his slumbers, Ahab, face to face, saw the Parsee; and
hooped round by the gloom of the night they seemed the last men in a
flooded world. I have dreamed it again, said he.

Of the hearses? Have I not said, old man, that neither hearse nor
coffin can be thine?

And who are hearsed that die on the sea?

But I said, old man, that ere thou couldst die on this voyage, two
hearses must verily be seen by thee on the sea; the first not made by
mortal hands; and the visible wood of the last one must be grown in
America.

Aye, aye! a strange sight that, Parsee:a hearse and its plumes
floating over the ocean with the waves for the pall-bearers. Ha! Such a
sight we shall not soon see.

Believe it or not, thou canst not die till it be seen, old man.

And what was that saying about thyself?

Though it come to the last, I shall still go before thee thy pilot.

And when thou art so gone beforeif that ever befallthen ere I can
follow, thou must still appear to me, to pilot me still?Was it not so?
Well, then, did I believe all ye say, oh my pilot! I have here two
pledges that I shall yet slay Moby Dick and survive it.

Take another pledge, old man, said the Parsee, as his eyes lighted up
like fire-flies in the gloom,Hemp only can kill thee.

The gallows, ye mean.I am immortal then, on land and on sea, cried
Ahab, with a laugh of derision;Immortal on land and on sea!

Both were silent again, as one man. The grey dawn came on, and the
slumbering crew arose from the boats bottom, and ere noon the dead
whale was brought to the ship.




