CHAPTER LXIV. STUBBS SUPPER


Stubbs whale had been killed some distance from the ship. It was a
calm; so, forming a tandem of three boats, we commenced the slow
business of towing the trophy to the Pequod. And now, as we eighteen
men with our thirty-six arms, and one hundred and eighty thumbs and
fingers, slowly toiled hour after hour upon that inert, sluggish corpse
in the sea; and it seemed hardly to budge at all, except at long
intervals; good evidence was hereby furnished of the enormousness of
the mass we moved. For, upon the great canal of Hang-Ho, or whatever
they call it, in China, four or five laborers on the foot-path will
draw a bulky freighted junk at the rate of a mile an hour; but this
grand argosy we towed heavily forged along, as if laden with pig-lead
in bulk.

Darkness came on; but three lights up and down in the Pequods
main-rigging dimly guided our way; till drawing nearer we saw Ahab
dropping one of several more lanterns over the bulwarks. Vacantly
eyeing the heaving whale for a moment, he issued the usual orders for
securing it for the night, and then handing his lantern to a seaman,
went his way into the cabin, and did not come forward again until
morning.

Though, in overseeing the pursuit of this whale, Captain Ahab had
evinced his customary activity, to call it so; yet now that the
creature was dead, some vague dissatisfaction, or impatience, or
despair, seemed working in him; as if the sight of that dead body
reminded him that Moby Dick was yet to be slain; and though a thousand
other whales were brought to his ship, all that would not one jot
advance his grand, monomaniac object. Very soon you would have thought
from the sound on the Pequods decks, that all hands were preparing to
cast anchor in the deep; for heavy chains are being dragged along the
deck, and thrust rattling out of the port-holes. But by those clanking
links, the vast corpse itself, not the ship, is to be moored. Tied by
the head to the stern, and by the tail to the bows, the whale now lies
with its black hull close to the vessels, and seen through the
darkness of the night, which obscured the spars and rigging aloft, the
twoship and whale, seemed yoked together like colossal bullocks,
whereof one reclines while the other remains standing.[14]

 [14] A little item may as well be related here. The strongest and most
 reliable hold which the ship has upon the whale when moored alongside,
 is by the flukes or tail; and as from its greater density that part is
 relatively heavier than any other (excepting the side-fins), its
 flexibility even in death, causes it to sink low beneath the surface;
 so that with the hand you cannot get at it from the boat, in order to
 put the chain round it. But this difficulty is ingeniously overcome: a
 small, strong line is prepared with a wooden float at its outer end,
 and a weight in its middle, while the other end is secured to the
 ship. By adroit management the wooden float is made to rise on the
 other side of the mass, so that now having girdled the whale, the
 chain is readily made to follow suit; and being slipped along the
 body, is at last locked fast round the smallest part of the tail, at
 the point of junction with its broad flukes or lobes.

If moody Ahab was now all quiescence, at least so far as could be known
on deck, Stubb, his second mate, flushed with conquest, betrayed an
unusual but still good-natured excitement. Such an unwonted bustle was
he in that the staid Starbuck, his official superior, quietly resigned
to him for the time the sole management of affairs. One small, helping
cause of all this liveliness in Stubb, was soon made strangely
manifest. Stubb was a high liver; he was somewhat intemperately fond of
the whale as a flavorish thing to his palate.

A steak, a steak, ere I sleep! You, Daggoo! overboard you go, and cut
me one from his small!

Here be it known, that though these wild fishermen do not, as a general
thing, and according to the great military maxim, make the enemy defray
the current expenses of the war (at least before realizing the proceeds
of the voyage), yet now and then you find some of these Nantucketers
who have a genuine relish for that particular part of the Sperm Whale
designated by Stubb; comprising the tapering extremity of the body.

About midnight that steak was cut and cooked; and lighted by two
lanterns of sperm oil, Stubb stoutly stood up to his spermaceti supper
at the capstan-head, as if that capstan were a sideboard. Nor was Stubb
the only banqueter on whales flesh that night. Mingling their
mumblings with his own mastications, thousands on thousands of sharks,
swarming round the dead leviathan, smackingly feasted on its fatness.
The few sleepers below in their bunks were often startled by the sharp
slapping of their tails against the hull, within a few inches of the
sleepers hearts. Peering over the side you could just see them (as
before you heard them) wallowing in the sullen, black waters, and
turning over on their backs as they scooped out huge globular pieces of
the whale of the bigness of a human head. This particular feat of the
shark seems all but miraculous. How, at such an apparently unassailable
surface, they contrive to gouge out such symmetrical mouthfuls, remains
a part of the universal problem of all things. The mark they thus leave
on the whale, may best be likened to the hollow made by a carpenter in
countersinking for a screw.

Though amid all the smoking horror and diabolism of a sea-fight, sharks
will be seen longingly gazing up to the ships decks, like hungry dogs
round a table where red meat is being carved, ready to bolt down every
killed man that is tossed to them; and though, while the valiant
butchers over the deck-table are thus cannibally carving each others
live meat with carving-knives all gilded and tasselled, the sharks,
also, with their jewel-hilted mouths, are quarrelsomely carving away
under the table at the dead meat; and though, were you to turn the
whole affair upside down, it would still be pretty much the same thing,
that is to say, a shocking sharkish business enough for all parties;
and though sharks also are the invariable outriders of all slave ships
crossing the Atlantic, systematically trotting alongside, to be handy
in case a parcel is to be carried anywhere, or a dead slave to be
decently buried; and though one or two other like instances might be
set down, touching the set terms, places, and occasions, when sharks do
most socially congregate, and most hilariously feast; yet is there no
conceivable time or occasion when you will find them in such countless
numbers, and in gayer or more jovial spirits, than around a dead sperm
whale, moored by night to a whale-ship at sea. If you have never seen
that sight, then suspend your decision about the propriety of
devil-worship, and the expediency of conciliating the devil.

But, as yet, Stubb heeded not the mumblings of the banquet that was
going on so nigh him, no more than the sharks heeded the smacking of
his own epicurean lips.

Cook, cook!wheres that old Fleece? he cried at length, widening his
legs still further, as if to form a more secure base for his supper;
and, at the same time darting his fork into the dish, as if stabbing
with his lance; cook, you cook!sail this way, cook!

The old black, not in any very high glee at having been previously
routed from his warm hammock at a most unseasonable hour, came
shambling along from his galley, for, like many old blacks, there was
something the matter with his knee-pans, which he did not keep well
scoured like his other pans; this old Fleece, as they called him, came
shuffling and limping along, assisting his step with his tongs, which,
after a clumsy fashion, were made of straightened iron hoops; this old
Ebony floundered along, and in obedience to the word of command, came
to a dead stop on the opposite side of Stubbs sideboard; when, with
both hands folded before him, and resting on his two-legged cane, he
bowed his arched back still further over, at the same time sideways
inclining his head, so as to bring his best ear into play.

Cook, said Stubb, rapidly lifting a rather reddish morsel to his
mouth, dont you think this steak is rather overdone? Youve been
beating this steak too much, cook; its too tender. Dont I always say
that to be good, a whale-steak must be tough? There are those sharks
now over the side, dont you see they prefer it tough and rare? What a
shindy they are kicking up! Cook, go and talk to em; tell em they are
welcome to help themselves civilly, and in moderation, but they must
keep quiet. Blast me, if I can hear my own voice. Away, cook, and
deliver my message. Here, take this lantern, snatching one from his
sideboard; now then, go and preach to em!

Sullenly taking the offered lantern, old Fleece limped across the deck
to the bulwarks; and then, with one hand dropping his light low over
the sea, so as to get a good view of his congregation, with the other
hand he solemnly flourished his tongs, and leaning far over the side in
a mumbling voice began addressing the sharks, while Stubb, softly
crawling behind, overheard all that was said.

Fellow-critters: Ise ordered here to say dat you must stop dat dam
noise dare. You hear? Stop dat dam smackin ob de lip! massa Stubb say
dat you can fill your dam bellies up to de hatchings, but by Gor! you
must stop dat dam racket!

Cook, here interposed Stubb, accompanying the word with a sudden slap
on the shoulder,Cook! why, damn your eyes, you mustnt swear that way
when youre preaching. Thats no way to convert sinners, Cook!

Who dat? Den preach to him yourself, sullenly turning to go.

No, Cook; go on, go on.

Well, den, Belubed fellow-critters:

Right! exclaimed Stubb, approvingly, coax em to it; try that, and
Fleece continued.

Do you is all sharks, and by natur wery woracious, yet I zay to you,
fellow-critters, dat dat woraciousnesstop dat dam slappin ob de
tail! How you tink to hear, spose you keep up such a dam slappin and
bitin dare?

Cook, cried Stubb, collaring him, I wont have that swearing. Talk to
em gentlemanly.

Once more the sermon proceeded.

Your woraciousness, fellow-critters, I dont blame ye so much for; dat
is natur, and cant be helped; but to gobern dat wicked natur, dat is
de pint. You is sharks, sartin; but if you gobern de shark in you, why
den you be angel; for all angel is noting more dan de shark well
goberned. Now, look here, bredren, just try wonst to be cibil, a
helping yourselbs from dat whale. Dont be tearin de blubber out your
neighbours mout, I say. Is not one shark dood right as toder to dat
whale? And, by Gor, none on you has de right to dat whale; dat whale
belong to some one else. I know some o you has berry brig mout,
brigger dan oders; but den de brig mouts sometimes has de small
bellies; so dat de brigness ob de mout is not to swallar wid, but to
bite off de blubber for de small fry ob sharks, dat cant get into de
scrouge to help demselves.

Well done, old Fleece! cried Stubb, thats Christianity; go on.

No use goin on; de dam willains will keep a scrougin and slappin
each oder, Massa Stubb; dey dont hear one word; no use a-preachin to
such dam guttons as you call em, till dare bellies is full, and dare
bellies is bottomless; and when dey do get em full, dey wont hear you
den; for den dey sink in de sea, go fast to sleep on de coral, and
cant hear noting at all, no more, for eber and eber.

Upon my soul, I am about of the same opinion; so give the benediction,
Fleece, and Ill away to my supper.

Upon this, Fleece, holding both hands over the fishy mob, raised his
shrill voice, and cried

Cussed fellow-critters! Kick up de damndest row as ever you can; fill
your dam bellies till dey bustand den die.

Now, cook, said Stubb, resuming his supper at the capstan; Stand
just where you stood before, there, over against me, and pay particular
attention.

All dention, said Fleece, again stooping over upon his tongs in the
desired position.

Well, said Stubb, helping himself freely meanwhile; I shall now go
back to the subject of this steak. In the first place, how old are you,
cook?

What dat do wid de teak, said the old black, testily.

Silence! How old are you, cook?

Bout ninety, dey say, he gloomily muttered.

And have you lived in this world hard upon one hundred years, cook,
and dont know yet how to cook a whale-steak? rapidly bolting another
mouthful at the last word, so that that morsel seemed a continuation of
the question. Where were you born, cook?

Hind de hatchway, in ferry-boat, goin ober de Roanoke.

Born in a ferry-boat! Thats queer, too. But I want to know what
country you were born in, cook?

Didnt I say de Roanoke country? he cried, sharply.

No, you didnt, cook; but Ill tell you what Im coming to, cook. You
must go home and be born over again; you dont know how to cook a
whale-steak yet.

Bress my soul, if I cook noder one, he growled, angrily, turning
round to depart.

Come back, cook;here, hand me those tongs;now take that bit of steak
there, and tell me if you think that steak cooked as it should be? Take
it, I sayholding the tongs towards himtake it, and taste it.

Faintly smacking his withered lips over it for a moment, the old negro
muttered, Best cooked teak I eber taste; joosy, berry joosy.

Cook, said Stubb, squaring himself once more; do you belong to the
church?

Passed one once in Cape-Down, said the old man sullenly.

And you have once in your life passed a holy church in Cape-Town,
where you doubtless overheard a holy parson addressing his hearers as
his beloved fellow-creatures, have you, cook! And yet you come here,
and tell me such a dreadful lie as you did just now, eh? said Stubb.
Where do you expect to go to, cook?

Go to bed berry soon, he mumbled, half-turning as he spoke.

Avast! heave to! I mean when you die, cook. Its an awful question.
Now whats your answer?

When dis old brack man dies, said the negro slowly, changing his
whole air and demeanor, he hisself wont go nowhere; but some bressed
angel will come and fetch him.

Fetch him? How? In a coach and four, as they fetched Elijah? And fetch
him where?

Up dere, said Fleece, holding his tongs straight over his head, and
keeping it there very solemnly.

So, then, you expect to go up into our main-top, do you, cook, when
you are dead? But dont you know the higher you climb, the colder it
gets? Main-top, eh?

Didnt say dat tall, said Fleece, again in the sulks.

You said up there, didnt you, and now look yourself, and see where
your tongs are pointing. But, perhaps you expect to get into heaven by
crawling through the lubbers hole, cook; but no, no, cook, you dont
get there, except you go the regular way, round by the rigging. Its a
ticklish business, but must be done, or else its no go. But none of us
are in heaven yet. Drop your tongs, cook, and hear my orders. Do ye
hear? Hold your hat in one hand, and clap tother atop of your heart,
when Im giving my orders, cook. What! that your heart, there?thats
your gizzard! Aloft! aloft!thats itnow you have it. Hold it there
now, and pay attention.

All dention, said the old black, with both hands placed as desired,
vainly wriggling his grizzled head, as if to get both ears in front at
one and the same time.

Well then, cook; you see this whale-steak of yours was so very bad,
that I have put it out of sight as soon as possible; you see that,
dont you? Well, for the future, when you cook another whale-steak for
my private table here, the capstan, Ill tell you what to do so as not
to spoil it by overdoing. Hold the steak in one hand, and show a live
coal to it with the other; that done, dish it; dye hear? And now
to-morrow, cook, when we are cutting in the fish, be sure you stand by
to get the tips of his fins; have them put in pickle. As for the ends
of the flukes, have them soused, cook. There, now ye may go.

But Fleece had hardly got three paces off, when he was recalled.

Cook, give me cutlets for supper to-morrow night in the mid-watch.
Dye hear? away you sail, then.Halloa! stop! make a bow before you
go.Avast heaving again! Whale-balls for breakfastdont forget.

Wish, by gor! whale eat him, stead of him eat whale. Im bressed if
he aint more of shark dan Massa Shark hisself, muttered the old man,
limping away; with which sage ejaculation he went to his hammock.




CHAPTER LXV. THE WHALE AS A DISH


That mortal man should feed upon the creature that feeds his lamp, and,
like Stubb, eat him by his own light, as you may say; this seems so
outlandish a thing that one must needs go a little into the history and
philosophy of it.

It is upon record, that three centuries ago the tongue of the Right
Whale was esteemed a great delicacy in France, and commanded large
prices there. Also, that in Henry VIIIths time, a certain cook of the
court obtained a handsome reward for inventing an admirable sauce to be
eaten with barbacued porpoises, which, you remember, are a species of
whale. Porpoises, indeed, are to this day considered fine eating. The
meat is made into balls about the size of billiard balls, and being
well seasoned and spiced might be taken for turtle-balls or veal balls.
The old monks of Dunfermline were very fond of them. They had a great
porpoise grant from the crown.

The fact is, that among his hunters at least, the whale would by all
hands be considered a noble dish, were there not so much of him; but
when you come to sit down before a meat-pie nearly one hundred feet
long, it takes away your appetite. Only the most unprejudiced of men
like Stubb, nowadays partake of cooked whales; but the Esquimaux are
not so fastidious. We all know how they live upon whales, and have rare
old vintages of prime old train oil. Zogranda, one of their most famous
doctors, recommends strips of blubber for infants, as being exceedingly
juicy and nourishing. And this reminds me that certain Englishmen, who
long ago were accidentally left in Greenland by a whaling vesselthat
these men actually lived for several months on the mouldy scraps of
whales which had been left ashore after trying out the blubber. Among
the Dutch whalemen these scraps are called fritters; which, indeed,
they greatly resemble, being brown and crisp, and smelling something
like old Amsterdam housewives dough-nuts or oly-cooks, when fresh.
They have such an eatable look that the most self-denying stranger can
hardly keep his hands off.

But what further depreciates the whale as a civilized dish, is his
exceeding richness. He is the great prize ox of the sea, too fat to be
delicately good. Look at his hump, which would be as fine eating as the
buffalos (which is esteemed a rare dish), were it not such a solid
pyramid of fat. But the spermaceti itself, how bland and creamy that
is; like the transparent, half-jellied, white meat of a cocoanut in the
third month of its growth, yet far too rich to supply a substitute for
butter. Nevertheless, many whalemen have a method of absorbing it into
some other substance, and then partaking of it. In the long try watches
of the night it is a common thing for the seamen to dip their
ship-biscuit into the huge oil-pots and let them fry there awhile. Many
a good supper have I thus made.

In the case of a small Sperm Whale the brains are accounted a fine
dish. The casket of the skull is broken into with an axe, and the two
plump, whitish lobes being withdrawn (precisely resembling two large
puddings), they are then mixed with flour, and cooked into a most
delectable mess, in flavor somewhat resembling calves head, which is
quite a dish among some epicures; and every one knows that some young
bucks among the epicures, by continually dining upon calves brains, by
and by get to have a little brains of their own, so as to be able to
tell a calfs head from their own heads; which, indeed, requires
uncommon discrimination. And that is the reason why a young buck with
an intelligent looking calfs head before him, is somehow one of the
saddest sights you can see. The head looks a sort of reproachfully at
him, with an Et tu Brute! expression.

It is not, perhaps, entirely because the whale is so excessively
unctuous that landsmen seem to regard the eating of him with
abhorrence; that appears to result, in some way, from the consideration
before mentioned: i. e. that a man should eat a newly murdered thing of
the sea, and eat it too by its own light. But no doubt the first man
that ever murdered an ox was regarded as a murderer; perhaps he was
hung; and if he had been put on his trial by oxen, he certainly would
have been; and he certainly deserved it if any murderer does. Go to the
meat-market of a Saturday night and see the crowds of live bipeds
staring up at the long rows of dead quadrupeds. Does not that sight
take a tooth out of the cannibals jaw? Cannibals? who is not a
cannibal? I tell you it will be more tolerable for the Fejee that
salted down a lean missionary in his cellar against a coming famine; it
will be more tolerable for that provident Fejee, I say, in the day of
judgment, than for thee, civilized and enlightened gourmand, who
nailest geese to the ground and feastest on their bloated livers in thy
pat-de-foie-gras.

But Stubb, he eats the whale by its own light, does he? and that is
adding insult to injury, is it? Look at your knife-handle, there, my
civilized and enlightened gourmand dining off that roast beef, what is
that handle made of?what but the bones of the brother of the very ox
you are eating? And what do you pick your teeth with, after devouring
that fat goose? With a feather of the same fowl. And with what quill
did the Secretary of the Society for the Suppression of Cruelty to
Ganders formally indite his circulars? It is only within the last month
or two that that society passed a resolution to patronize nothing but
steel pens.




CHAPTER LXVI. THE SHARK MASSACRE


When in the Southern Fishery, a captured Sperm Whale, after long and
weary toil, is brought alongside late at night, it is not, as a general
thing at least, customary to proceed at once to the business of cutting
him in. For that business is an exceedingly laborious one; is not very
soon completed; and requires all hands to set about it. Therefore, the
common usage is to take in all sail; lash the helm alee; and then send
every one below to his hammock till daylight, with the reservation
that, until that time, anchor-watches shall be kept; that is, two and
two for an hour, each couple, the crew in rotation shall mount the deck
to see that all goes well.

But sometimes, especially upon the Line in the Pacific, this plan will
not answer at all; because such incalculable hosts of sharks gather
round the moored carcase, that were he left so for six hours, say, on a
stretch, little more than the skeleton would be visible by morning. In
most other parts of the ocean, however, where these fish do not so
largely abound, their wondrous voracity can be at times considerably
diminished, by vigorously stirring them up with sharp whaling-spades, a
procedure notwithstanding, which, in some instances, only seems to
tickle them into still greater activity. But it was not thus in the
present case with the Pequods sharks; though, to be sure, any man
unaccustomed to such sights, to have looked over her side that night,
would have almost thought the whole round sea was one huge cheese, and
those sharks the maggots in it.

Nevertheless, upon Stubb setting the anchor-watch after his supper was
concluded; and when, accordingly, Queequeg and a forecastle seaman came
on deck, no small excitement was created among the sharks; for
immediately suspending the cutting stages over the side, and lowering
three lanterns, so that they cast long gleams of light over the turbid
sea, these two mariners, darting their long whaling-spades, kept up an
incessant murdering of the sharks,[15] by striking the keen steel deep
into their skulls, seemingly their only vital part. But in the foamy
confusion of their mixed and struggling hosts, the marksmen could not
always hit their mark; and this brought about new revelations of the
incredible ferocity of the foe. They viciously snapped, not only at
each others disembowelments, but like flexible bows, bent round, and
bit their own; till those entrails seemed swallowed over and over again
by the same mouth, to be oppositely voided by the gaping wound. Nor was
this all. It was unsafe to meddle with the corpses and ghosts of these
creatures. A sort of generic or Pantheistic vitality seemed to lurk in
their very joints and bones, after what might be called the individual
life had departed. Killed and hoisted on deck for the sake of his skin,
one of these sharks almost took poor Queequegs hand off, when he tried
to shut down the dead lid of his murderous jaw.

 [15] The whaling-spade used for cutting-in is made of the very best
 steel; is about the bigness of a mans spread hand; and in general
 shape, corresponds to the garden implement after which it is named;
 only its sides are perfectly flat, and its upper end considerably
 narrower than the lower. This weapon is always kept as sharp as
 possible; and when being used is occasionally honed, just like a
 razor. In its socket, a stiff pole, from twenty to thirty feet long,
 is inserted for a handle.

Queequeg no care what god made him shark, said the savage,
agonizingly lifting his hand up and down; wedder Fejee god or
Nantucket god; but de god wat made shark must be one dam Ingin.




