CHAPTER XC. HEADS OR TAILS


De balena vero sufficit, si rex habeat caput, et regina caudam.

_Bracton, l._ 3. _c._ 3.

Latin from the books of the Laws of England, which taken along with the
context, means, that of all whales captured by anybody on the coast of
that land, the King, as Honorary Grand Harpooneer, must have the head,
and the Queen be respectfully presented with the tail. A division
which, in the whale, is much like halving an apple; there is no
intermediate remainder. Now as this law, under a modified form, is to
this day in force in England; and as it offers in various respects a
strange anomaly touching the general law of Fast and Loose-Fish, it is
here treated of in a separate chapter, on the same courteous principle
that prompts the English railways to be at the expense of a separate
car, specially reserved for the accommodation of royalty. In the first
place, in curious proof of the fact that the above-mentioned law is
still in force, I proceed to lay before you a circumstance that
happened within the last two years.

It seems that some honest mariners of Dover, or Sandwich, or some one
of the Cinque Ports, had after a hard chase succeeded in killing and
beaching a fine whale which they had originally descried afar off from
the shore. Now the Cinque Ports are partially or somehow under the
jurisdiction of a sort of policeman or beadle, called a Lord Warden.
Holding the office directly from the crown, I believe, all the royal
emoluments incident to the Cinque Port territories become by assignment
his. By some writers this office is called a sinecure. But not so.
Because the Lord Warden is busily employed at times in fobbing his
perquisites; which are his chiefly by virtue of that same fobbing of
them.

Now when these poor sun-burnt mariners, bare-footed, and with their
trowsers rolled high up on their eely legs, had wearily hauled their
fat fish high and dry, promising themselves a good 150 from the
precious oil and bone; and in fantasy sipping rare tea with their
wives, and good ale with their cronies, upon the strength of their
respective shares; up steps a very learned and most Christian and
charitable gentleman, with a copy of Blackstone under his arm; and
laying it upon the whales head, he saysHands off! this fish, my
masters, is a Fast-Fish. I seize it as the Lord Wardens. Upon this
the poor mariners in their respectful consternationso truly
Englishknowing not what to say, fall to vigorously scratching their
heads all round; meanwhile ruefully glancing from the whale to the
stranger. But that did in nowise mend the matter, or at all soften the
hard heart of the learned gentleman with the copy of Blackstone. At
length one of them, after long scratching about for his ideas, made
bold to speak.

Please, sir, who is the Lord Warden?

The Duke.

But the duke had nothing to do with taking this fish?

It is his.

We have been at great trouble, and peril, and some expense, and is all
that to go to the Dukes benefit; we getting nothing at all for our
pains but our blisters?

It is his.

Is the Duke so very poor as to be forced to this desperate mode of
getting a livelihood?

It is his.

I thought to relieve my old bed-ridden mother by part of my share of
this whale.

It is his.

Wont the Duke be content with a quarter or a half?

It is his.

In a word, the whale was seized and sold, and his Grace the Duke of
Wellington received the money. Thinking that viewed in some particular
lights, the case might by a bare possibility in some small degree be
deemed, under the circumstances, a rather hard one, an honest clergyman
of the town respectfully addressed a note to his Grace, begging him to
take the case of those unfortunate mariners into full consideration. To
which my Lord Duke in substance replied (both letters were published)
that he had already done so, and received the money, and would be
obliged to the reverend gentleman if for the future he (the reverend
gentleman) would decline meddling with other peoples business. Is this
the still militant old man, standing at the corners of the three
kingdoms, on all hands coercing alms of beggars?

It will readily be seen that in this case the alleged right of the Duke
to the whale was a delegated one from the Sovereign. We must needs
inquire then on what principle the Sovereign is originally invested
with that right. The law itself has already been set forth. But Plowdon
gives us the reason for it. Says Plowdon, the whale so caught belongs
to the King and Queen, because of its superior excellence. And by the
soundest commentators this has ever been held a cogent argument in such
matters.

But why should the King have the head, and the Queen the tail? A reason
for that, ye lawyers!

In his treatise on Queen-Gold, or Queen-pinmoney, an old Kings Bench
author, one William Prynne, thus discourseth: Ye tail is ye Queens,
that ye Queens wardrobe may be supplied with ye whalebone. Now this
was written at a time when the black limber bone of the Greenland or
Right whale was largely used in ladies bodices. But this same bone is
not in the tail; it is in the head, which is a sad mistake for a
sagacious lawyer like Prynne. But is the Queen a mermaid, to be
presented with a tail? An allegorical meaning may lurk here.

There are two royal fish so styled by the English law writersthe whale
and the sturgeon; both royal property under certain limitations, and
nominally supplying the tenth branch of the crowns ordinary revenue. I
know not that any other author has hinted of the matter; but by
inference it seems to me that the sturgeon must be divided in the same
way as the whale, the King receiving the highly dense and elastic head
peculiar to that fish, which, symbolically regarded, may possibly be
humorously grounded upon some presumed congeniality. And thus there
seems a reason in all things, even in law.




CHAPTER XCI. THE PEQUOD MEETS THE ROSE-BUD


In vain it was to rake for Ambergriese in the paunch of this
Leviathan, insufferable fetor denying not inquiry.

_Sir T. Browne, V. E._

It was a week or two after the last whaling scene recounted, and when
we were slowly sailing over a sleepy, vapory, mid-day sea, that the
many noses on the Pequods deck proved more vigilant discoverers than
the three pairs of eyes aloft. A peculiar and not very pleasant smell
was smelt in the sea.

I will bet something now, said Stubb, that somewhere hereabouts are
some of those drugged whales we tickled the other day. I thought they
would keel up before long.

Presently, the vapors in advance slid aside; and there in the distance
lay a ship, whose furled sails betokened that some sort of whale must
be alongside. As we glided nearer, the stranger showed French colors
from his peak; and by the eddying cloud of vulture sea-fowl that
circled, and hovered, and swooped around him, it was plain that the
whale alongside must be what the fishermen call a blasted whale, that
is, a whale that has died unmolested on the sea, and so floated an
unappropriated corpse. It may well be conceived, what an unsavory odor
such a mass must exhale; worse than an Assyrian city in the plague,
when the living are incompetent to bury the departed. So intolerable
indeed is it regarded by some, that no cupidity could persuade them to
moor alongside of it. Yet are there those who will still do it;
notwithstanding the fact that the oil obtained from such subjects is of
a very inferior quality, and by no means of the nature of
attar-of-rose.

Coming still nearer with the expiring breeze, we saw that the Frenchman
had a second whale alongside; and this second whale seemed even more of
a nosegay than the first. In truth, it turned out to be one of those
problematical whales that seem to dry up and die with a sort of
prodigious dyspepsia, or indigestion; leaving their defunct bodies
almost entirely bankrupt of anything like oil. Nevertheless, in the
proper place we shall see that no knowing fisherman will ever turn up
his nose at such a whale as this, however much he may shun blasted
whales in general.

The Pequod had now swept so nigh to the stranger, that Stubb vowed he
recognized his cutting spade-pole entangled in the lines that were
knotted round the tail of one of these whales.

Theres a pretty fellow, now, he banteringly laughed, standing in the
ships bows, theres a jackal for ye! I well know that these Crappoes
of Frenchmen are but poor devils in the fishery; sometimes lowering
their boats for breakers, mistaking them for Sperm Whale spouts; yes,
and sometimes sailing from their port with their hold full of boxes of
tallow candles, and cases of snuffers, foreseeing that all the oil they
will get wont be enough to dip the Captains wick into; aye, we all
know these things; but look ye, heres a Crappo that is content with
our leavings, the drugged whale there, I mean; aye, and is content too
with scraping the dry bones of that other precious fish he has there.
Poor devil! I say, pass round a hat, some one, and lets make him a
present of a little oil for dear charitys sake. For what oil hell get
from that drugged whale there, wouldnt be fit to burn in a jail; no,
not in a condemned cell. And as for the other whale, why, Ill agree to
get more oil by chopping up and trying out these three masts of ours,
than hell get from that bundle of bones; though, now that I think of
it, it may contain something worth a good deal more than oil; yes,
ambergris. I wonder now if our old man has thought of that. Its worth
trying. Yes, Im for it; and so saying he started for the
quarter-deck.

By this time the faint air had become a complete calm; so that whether
or no, the Pequod was now fairly entrapped in the smell, with no hope
of escaping except by its breezing up again. Issuing from the cabin,
Stubb now called his boats crew, and pulled off for the stranger.
Drawing across her bow, he perceived that in accordance with the
fanciful French taste, the upper part of her stem-piece was carved in
the likeness of a huge drooping stalk, was painted green, and for
thorns had copper spikes projecting from it here and there; the whole
terminating in a symmetrical folded bulb of a bright red color. Upon
her head boards, in large gilt letters, he read Bouton de
Rose,Rose-button, or Rose-bud; and this was the romantic name of this
aromatic ship.

Though Stubb did not understand the _Bouton_ part of the inscription,
yet the word _rose_, and the bulbous figure-head put together,
sufficiently explained the whole to him.

A wooden rose-bud, eh? he cried with his hand to his nose, that will
do very well; but how like all creation it smells!

Now in order to hold direct communication with the people on deck, he
had to pull round the bows to the starboard side, and thus come close
to the blasted whale; and so talk over it.

Arrived then at this spot, with one hand still to his nose, he
bawledBouton-de-Rose, ahoy! are there any of you Bouton-de-Roses that
speak English?

Yes, rejoined a Guernsey-man from the bulwarks, who turned out to be
the chief-mate.

Well, then, my Bouton-de-Rose-bud, have you seen the White Whale?

_What_ whale?

The _White_ Whalea Sperm WhaleMoby Dick, have ye seen him?

Never heard of such a whale. Cachalot Blanche! White Whaleno.

Very good, then; good bye now, and Ill call again in a minute.

Then rapidly pulling back towards the Pequod, and seeing Ahab leaning
over the quarter-deck rail awaiting his report, he moulded his two
hands into a trumpet and shoutedNo, Sir! No! Upon which Ahab
retired, and Stubb returned to the Frenchman.

He now perceived that the Guernsey-man, who had just got into the
chains, and was using a cutting-spade, had slung his nose in a sort of
bag.

Whats the matter with your nose, there? said Stubb. Broke it?

I wish it was broken, or that I didnt have any nose at all! answered
the Guernsey-man, who did not seem to relish the job he was at very
much. But what are you holding _yours_ for?

Oh, nothing! Its a wax nose; I have to hold it on. Fine day, aint it?
Air rather gardenny, I should say; throw us a bunch of posies, will ye,
Bouton-de-Rose?

What in the devils name do you want here? roared the Guernsey-man,
flying into a sudden passion.

Oh! keep coolcool? yes, thats the word; why dont you pack those
whales in ice while youre working at em? But joking aside, though; do
you know, Rose-bud, that its all nonsense trying to get any oil out of
such whales? As for that dried up one, there, he hasnt a gill in his
whole carcase.

I know that well enough; but, dye see, the Captain here wont believe
it; this is his first voyage; he was a Cologne manufacturer before. But
come aboard, and mayhap hell believe you, if he wont me; and so Ill
get out of this dirty scrape.

Anything to oblige ye, my sweet and pleasant fellow, rejoined Stubb,
and with that he soon mounted to the deck. There a queer scene
presented itself. The sailors, in tasselled caps of red worsted, were
getting the heavy tackles in readiness for the whales. But they worked
rather slow and talked very fast, and seemed in anything but a good
humor. All their noses upwardly projected from their faces like so many
jib-booms. Now and then pairs of them would drop their work, and run up
to the mast-head to get some fresh air. Some thinking they would catch
the plague, dipped oakum in coal-tar, and at intervals held it to their
nostrils. Others having broken the stems of their pipes almost short
off at the bowl, were vigorously puffing tobacco-smoke, so that it
constantly filled their olfactories.

Stubb was struck by a shower of outcries and anathemas proceeding from
the Captains round-house abaft; and looking in that direction saw a
fiery face thrust from behind the door, which was held ajar from
within. This was the tormented surgeon, who, after in vain
remonstrating against the proceedings of the day, had betaken himself
to the Captains round-house (_cabinet_ he called it) to avoid the
pest; but still, could not help yelling out his entreaties and
indignations at times.

Marking all this, Stubb argued well for his scheme, and turning to the
Guernsey-man had a little chat with him, during which the stranger mate
expressed his detestation of his Captain as a conceited ignoramus, who
had brought them all into so unsavory and unprofitable a pickle.
Sounding him carefully, Stubb further perceived that the Guernsey-man
had not the slightest suspicion concerning the ambergris. He therefore
held his peace on that head, but otherwise was quite frank and
confidential with him, so that the two quickly concocted a little plan
for both circumventing and satirizing the Captain, without his at all
dreaming of distrusting their sincerity. According to this little plan
of theirs, the Guernsey-man, under cover of an interpreters office,
was to tell the Captain what he pleased, but as coming from Stubb; and
as for Stubb, he was to utter any nonsense that should come uppermost
in him during the interview.

By this time their destined victim appeared from his cabin. He was a
small and dark, but rather delicate looking man for a sea-captain, with
large whiskers and moustache, however; and wore a red cotton velvet
vest with watch-seals at his side. To this gentleman, Stubb was now
politely introduced by the Guernsey-man, who at once ostentatiously put
on the aspect of interpreting between them.

What shall I say to him first? said he.

Why, said Stubb, eyeing the velvet vest and the watch and seals, you
may as well begin by telling him that he looks a sort of babyish to me,
though I dont pretend to be a judge.

He says, Monsieur, said the Guernsey-man, in French, turning to his
captain, that only yesterday his ship spoke a vessel, whose captain
and chief-mate, with six sailors, had all died of a fever caught from a
blasted whale they had brought alongside.

Upon this the captain started, and eagerly desired to know more.

What now? said the Guernsey-man to Stubb.

Why, since he takes it so easy, tell him that now I have eyed him
carefully, Im quite certain that hes no more fit to command a
whale-ship than a St. Jago monkey. In fact, tell him from me hes a
baboon.

He vows and declares, Monsieur, that the other whale, the dried one,
is far more deadly than the blasted one; in fine, Monsieur, he conjures
us, as we value our lives, to cut loose from these fish.

Instantly the captain ran forward, and in a loud voice commanded his
crew to desist from hoisting the cutting-tackles, and at once cast
loose the cables and chains confining the whales to the ship.

What now? said the Guernsey-man, when the captain had returned to
them.

Why, let me see; yes, you may as well tell him now thatthatin fact,
tell him Ive diddled him, and (aside to himself) perhaps somebody
else.

He says, Monsieur, that hes very happy to have been of any service to
us.

Hearing this, the captain vowed that they were the grateful parties
(meaning himself and mate) and concluded by inviting Stubb down into
his cabin to drink a bottle of Bordeaux.

He wants you to take a glass of wine with him, said the interpreter.

Thank him heartily; but tell him its against my principles to drink
with the man Ive diddled. In fact, tell him I must go.

He says, Monsieur, that his principles wont admit of his drinking;
but that if Monsieur wants to live another day to drink, then Monsieur
had best drop all four boats, and pull the ship away from these whales,
for its so calm they wont drift.

By this time Stubb was over the side, and getting into his boat, hailed
the Guernsey-man to this effect,that having a long tow-line in his
boat, he would do what he could to help them, by pulling out the
lighter whale of the two from the ships side. While the Frenchmans
boats, then, were engaged in towing the ship one way, Stubb
benevolently towed away at his whale the other way, ostentatiously
slacking out a most unusually long tow-line.

Presently a breeze sprang up; Stubb feigned to cast off from the whale;
hoisting his boats, the Frenchman soon increased his distance, while
the Pequod slid in between him and Stubbs whale. Whereupon Stubb
quickly pulled to the floating body, and hailing the Pequod to give
notice of his intentions, at once proceeded to reap the fruit of his
unrighteous cunning. Seizing his sharp boat-spade, he commenced an
excavation in the body, a little behind the side fin. You would almost
have thought he was digging a cellar there in the sea; and when at
length his spade struck against the gaunt ribs, it was like turning up
old Roman tiles and pottery buried in fat English loam. His boats crew
were all in high excitement, eagerly helping their chief, and looking
as anxious as gold-hunters.

And all the time numberless fowls were diving, and ducking, and
screaming, and yelling, and fighting around them. Stubb was beginning
to look disappointed, especially as the horrible nosegay increased,
when suddenly from out the very heart of this plague, there stole a
faint stream of perfume, which flowed through the tide of bad smells
without being absorbed by it, as one river will flow into and then
along with another, without at all blending with it for a time.

I have it, I have it, cried Stubb, with delight, striking something
in the subterranean regions, a purse! a purse!

Dropping his spade, he thrust both hands in, and drew out handfuls of
something that looked like ripe Windsor soap, or rich mottled old
cheese; very unctuous and savory withal. You might easily dent it with
your thumb; it is of a hue between yellow and ash color. And this, good
friends, is ambergris, worth a gold guinea an ounce to any druggist.
Some six handfuls were obtained; but more was unavoidably lost in the
sea, and still more, perhaps, might have been secured were it not for
impatient Ahabs loud command to Stubb to desist, and come on board,
else the ship would bid them good bye.




