CHAPTER CXXIV. THE NEEDLE


Next morning the not-yet-subsided sea rolled in long slow billows of
mighty bulk, and striving in the Pequods gurgling track, pushed her on
like giants palms outspread. The strong, unstaggering breeze abounded
so, that sky and air seemed vast outbellying sails; the whole world
boomed before the wind. Muffled in the full morning light, the
invisible sun was only known by the spread intensity of his place;
where his bayonet rays moved on in stacks. Emblazonings, as of crowned
Babylonian kings and queens, reigned over everything. The sea was as a
crucible of molten gold, that bubblingly leaps with light and heat.

Long maintaining an enchanted silence, Ahab stood apart; and every time
the tetering ship loweringly pitched down her bowsprit, he turned to
eye the bright suns rays produced ahead; and when she profoundly
settled by the stern, he turned behind, and saw the suns rearward
place, and how the same yellow rays were blending with his undeviating
wake.

Ha, ha, my ship! thou mightest well be taken now for the sea-chariot
of the sun. Ho, ho! all ye nations before my prow, I bring the sun to
ye! Yoke on the further billows; hallo! a tandem, I drive the sea!

But suddenly reined back by some counter thought, he hurried towards
the helm, huskily demanding how the ship was heading.

East-sou-east, sir, said the frightened steersman.

Thou liest! smiting him with his clenched fist. Heading East at this
hour in the morning, and the sun astern?

Upon this every soul was confounded; for the phenomenon just then
observed by Ahab had unaccountably escaped every one else; but its very
blinding palpableness must have been the cause.

Thrusting his head half way into the binnacle, Ahab caught one glimpse
of the compasses; his uplifted arm slowly fell; for a moment he almost
seemed to stagger. Standing behind him Starbuck looked, and lo! the two
compasses pointed East, and the Pequod was as infallibly going West.

But ere the first wild alarm could get out abroad among the crew, the
old man with a rigid laugh exclaimed, I have it! It has happened
before. Mr. Starbuck, last nights thunder turned our compassesthats
all. Thou hast before now heard of such a thing, I take it.

Aye; but never before has it happened to me, sir, said the pale mate,
gloomily.

Here, it must needs be said, that accidents like this have in more than
one case occurred to ships in violent storms. The magnetic energy, as
developed in the mariners needle, is, as all know, essentially one
with the electricity beheld in heaven; hence it is not to be much
marvelled at, that such things should be. In instances where the
lightning has actually struck the vessel, so as to smite down some of
the spars and rigging, the effect upon the needle has at times been
still more fatal; all its loadstone virtue being annihilated, so that
the before magnetic steel was of no more use than an old wifes
knitting needle. But in either case, the needle never again, of itself,
recovers the original virtue thus marred or lost; and if the binnacle
compasses be affected, the same fate reaches all the others that may be
in the ship; even were the lowermost one inserted into the kelson.

Deliberately standing before the binnacle, and eyeing the transpointed
compasses, the old man, with the sharp of his extended hand, now took
the precise bearing of the sun, and satisfied that the needles were
exactly inverted, shouted out his orders for the ships course to be
changed accordingly. The yards were hard up; and once more the Pequod
thrust her undaunted bows into the opposing wind, for the supposed fair
one had only been juggling her.

Meanwhile, whatever were his own secret thoughts, Starbuck said
nothing, but quietly he issued all requisite orders; while Stubb and
Flaskwho in some small degree seemed then to be sharing his
feelingslikewise unmurmuringly acquiesced. As for the men, though some
of them lowly rumbled, their fear of Ahab was greater than their fear
of Fate. But as ever before, the pagan harpooneers remained almost
wholly unimpressed; or if impressed, it was only with a certain
magnetism shot into their congenial hearts from inflexible Ahabs.

For a space the old man walked the deck in rolling reveries. But
chancing to slip with his ivory heel, he saw the crushed copper
sight-tubes of the quadrant he had the day before dashed to the deck.

Thou poor, proud heaven-gazer and suns pilot! yesterday I wrecked
thee, and to-day the compasses would feign have wrecked me. So, so. But
Ahab is lord over the level load-stone yet. Mr. Starbucka lance
without a pole; a top-maul, and the smallest of the sail-makers
needles. Quick!

Accessory, perhaps, to the impulse dictating the thing he was now about
to do, were certain prudential motives, whose object might have been to
revive the spirits of his crew by a stroke of his subtile skill, in a
matter so wondrous as that of the inverted compasses. Besides, the old
man well knew that to steer by transpointed needles, though clumsily
practicable, was not a thing to be passed over by superstitious
sailors, without some shudderings and evil portents.

Men, said he, steadily turning upon the crew, as the mate handed him
the things he had demanded, my men, the thunder turned old Ahabs
needles; but out of this bit of steel Ahab can make one of his own,
that will point as true as any.

Abashed glances of servile wonder were exchanged by the sailors, as
this was said; and with fascinated eyes they awaited whatever magic
might follow. But Starbuck looked away.

With a blow from the top-maul Ahab knocked off the steel head of the
lance, and then handing to the mate the long iron rod remaining, bade
him hold it upright, without its touching the deck. Then, with the
maul, after repeatedly smiting the upper end of this iron rod, he
placed the blunted needle endwise on the top of it, and less strongly
hammered that, several times, the mate still holding the rod as before.
Then going through some small strange motions with itwhether
indispensable to the magnetizing of the steel, or merely intended to
augment the awe of the crew, is uncertainhe called for linen thread;
and moving to the binnacle, slipped out the two reversed needles there,
and horizontally suspended the sail-needle by its middle, over one of
the compass-cards. At first, the steel went round and round, quivering
and vibrating at either end; but at last it settled to its place, when
Ahab, who had been intently watching for this result, stepped frankly
back from the binnacle, and pointing his stretched arm towards it,
exclaimed,Look ye, for yourselves, if Ahab be not the lord of the
level loadstone! The sun is East, and that compass swears it!

One after another they peered in, for nothing but their own eyes could
persuade such ignorance as theirs, and one after another they slunk
away.

In his fiery eyes of scorn and triumph, you then saw Ahab in all his
fatal pride.




CHAPTER CXXV. THE LOG AND LINE


While now the fated Pequod had been so long afloat this voyage, the log
and line had but very seldom been in use. Owing to a confident reliance
upon other means of determining the vessels place, some merchantmen,
and many whalemen, especially when cruising, wholly neglect to heave
the log; though at the same time, and frequently more for forms sake
than anything else, regularly putting down upon the customary slate the
course steered by the ship, as well as the presumed average rate of
progression every hour. It had been thus with the Pequod. The wooden
reel and angular log attached hung, long untouched, just beneath the
railing of the after bulwarks. Rains and spray had damped it; the sun
and wind had warped it; all the elements had combined to rot a thing
that hung so idly. But heedless of all this, his mood seized Ahab, as
he happened to glance upon the reel, not many hours after the magnet
scene, and he remembered how his quadrant was no more, and recalled his
frantic oath about the level log and line. The ship was sailing
plungingly; astern the billows rolled in riots.

Forward, there! Heave the log!

Two seamen came. The golden-hued Tahitian and the grizzly Manxman.
Take the reel, one of ye, Ill heave.

They went towards the extreme stern, on the ships lee side, where the
deck, with the oblique energy of the wind, was now almost dipping into
the creamy, sidelong-rushing sea.

The Manxman took the reel, and holding it high up, by the projecting
handle-ends of the spindle, round which the spool of line revolved, so
stood with the angular log hanging downwards, till Ahab advanced to
him.

Ahab stood before him, and was lightly unwinding some thirty or forty
turns to form a preliminary hand-coil to toss overboard, when the old
Manxman, who was intently eyeing both him and the line, made bold to
speak.

Sir, I mistrust it; this line looks far gone, long heat and wet have
spoiled it.

Twill hold, old gentleman. Long heat and wet, have they spoiled thee?
Thou seemst to hold. Or, truer perhaps, life holds thee; not thou it.

I hold the spool, sir. But just as my captain says. With these grey
hairs of mine tis not worth while disputing, specially with a
superior, wholl neer confess.

Whats that? There nows a patched professor in Queen Natures
granite-founded College; but methinks hes too subservient. Where wert
thou born?

In the little rocky Isle of Man, sir.

Excellent! Thoust hit the world by that.

I know not, sir, but I was born there.

In the Isle of Man, hey? Well, the other way, its good. Heres a man
from Man; a man born in once independent Man, and now unmanned of Man;
which is sucked inby what? Up with the reel! The dead, blind wall
butts all inquiring heads at last. Up with it! So.

The log was heaved. The loose coils rapidly straightened out in a long
dragging line astern, and then, instantly, the reel began to whirl. In
turn, jerkingly raised and lowered by the rolling billows, the towing
resistance of the log caused the old reelman to stagger strangely.

Hold hard!

Snap! the overstrained line sagged down in one long festoon; the
tugging log was gone.

I crush the quadrant, the thunder turns the needles, and now the mad
sea parts the log-line. But Ahab can mend all. Haul in here, Tahitian;
reel up, Manxman. And look ye, let the carpenter make another log, and
mend thou the line. See to it.

There he goes now; to him nothings happened; but to me, the skewer
seems loosening out of the middle of the world. Haul in, haul in,
Tahitian! These lines run whole, and whirling out: come in broken, and
dragging slow. Ha, Pip? come to help; eh, Pip?

Pip? whom call ye Pip? Pip jumped from the whale-boat. Pips missing.
Lets see now if ye havent fished him up here, fisherman. It drags
hard; I guess hes holding on. Jerk him, Tahiti! Jerk him off; we haul
in no cowards here. Ho! theres his arm just breaking water. A hatchet!
a hatchet! cut it offwe haul in no cowards here. Captain Ahab! sir,
sir! heres Pip, trying to get on board again.

Peace, thou crazy loon, cried the Manxman, seizing him by the arm.
Away from the quarter-deck!

The greater idiot ever scolds the lesser, muttered Ahab, advancing.
Hands off from that holiness! Where sayest thou Pip was, boy?

Astern there, sir, astern! Lo, lo!

And who art thou, boy? I see not my reflection in the vacant pupils of
thy eyes. Oh God! that man should be a thing for immortal souls to
sieve through! Who art thou, boy?

Bell-boy, sir; ships-crier; ding, dong, ding! Pip! Pip! Pip! One
hundred pounds of clay reward for Pip; five feet highlooks
cowardlyquickest known by that! Ding, dong, ding! Whos seen Pip the
coward?

There can be no hearts above the snow-line. Oh, ye frozen heavens!
look down here. Ye did beget this luckless child, and have abandoned
him, ye creative libertines. Here, boy; Ahabs cabin shall be Pips
home henceforth, while Ahab lives. Thou touchest my inmost centre, boy;
thou art tied to me by cords woven of my heart-strings. Come, lets
down.

Whats this? heres velvet shark-skin, intently gazing at Ahabs
hand, and feeling it. Ah, now, had poor Pip but felt so kind a thing
as this, perhaps he had neer been lost! This seems to me, sir, as a
man-rope; something that weak souls may hold by. Oh, sir, let old Perth
now come and rivet these two hands together; the black one with the
white, for I will not let this go.

Oh, boy, nor will I thee, unless I should thereby drag thee to worse
horrors than are here. Come, then, to my cabin. Lo! ye believers in
gods all goodness, and in man all ill, lo you! see the omniscient gods
oblivious of suffering man; and man, though idiotic, and knowing not
what he does, yet full of the sweet things of love and gratitude. Come!
I feel prouder leading thee by thy black hand, than though I grasped an
Emperors!

There go two daft ones now, muttered the old Manxman. One daft with
strength, the other daft with weakness. But heres the end of the
rotten lineall dripping, too. Mend it, eh? I think we had best have a
new line altogether. Ill see Mr. Stubb about it.




